+++ 
draft = false
date = 2019-06-26T00:07:45+01:00
title = "Software Design Considerations"
description = ""
slug = "" 
tags = []
categories = []
externalLink = ""
series = []
+++

What are some of the design considerations to keep in mind with regards to software when we have to choose one aspect?

* Share resource and Race condition
	
	If we share resource then we need to consider about race condition scenarion. This is basically in case of multi-threaded environment.
	
* Centralization and Single Point of Failure

	If we think of centralizing some core functionality in one service (for re-usability) or routing traffic through one service (as a proxy or gateway) or basically service which is involved in all data flows, then we need to consider about Single Point of Failure and design for resiliency.
	
* Cache/Performance and Stale data/Storage

	For performance reasons, we may wanto to use caching solutions for faster retrieval of data but then we have to consider about data stale issues.
	
* Denormalization/Performance and Consistency 

	Sometimes for performance improvement we think of Denormalization (duplicating data in multiple tables to avoid joining large tables). In this case
	we need to consider about data consistency (if there is any update needs to be done then it should be done carefully in all places wherever data is been replicated)
	

Summary:

There will always be some kind of compromises on the architecture. We need to keep these kind of design considerations/trade-offs in mind so that as per problem domain we can apply specific solutions.
