+++ 
draft = true
date = 2019-07-30T23:40:45+01:00
title = "What is CAP Theorem?"
description = ""
slug = "" 
tags = []
categories = []
externalLink = ""
series = []
+++


* CAP = Consistency, Availability and Partition Tolerent

* CAP theorem is generally applicable to distributed systems. In order to cater to heavy workloads we think of scaling out our application by adding additional commodity hardware to system. 

* The CAP Theorem states that, in a distributed system (a collection of interconnected nodes that share data.), you can only have two out of the following three guarantees across a write/read pair: Consistency, Availability, and Partition Tolerance - one of them must be sacrificed. 

* In particular, the CAP theorem implies that in the presence of a network partition, one has to choose between consistency and availability.

* In the absence of network failure – that is, when the distributed system is running normally – both availability and consistency can be satisfied.

* CAP is frequently misunderstood as if one has to choose to abandon one of the three guarantees at all times. In fact, the choice is really between consistency and availability only when a network partition or failure happens; at all other times, no trade-off has to be made.

**Consistency** — A guarantee that every node in a distributed cluster returns the same, most recent, successful write. Consistency refers to every client having the same view of the data. There are various types of consistency models. Consistency in CAP (used to prove the theorem) refers to linearizability or sequential consistency, a very strong form of consistency.

**Availability** — Every non-failing node returns a response for all read and write requests in a reasonable amount of time. The key word here is every. To be available, every node on (either side of a network partition) must be able to respond in a reasonable amount of time.

**Partition Tolerant** — The system continues to function and upholds its consistency guarantees in spite of network partitions. Network partitions are a fact of life. Distributed systems guaranteeing partition tolerance can gracefully recover from partitions once the partition heals.

The CAP theorem categorizes systems into three categories:

CP (Consistent and Partition Tolerant) — At first glance, the CP category is confusing, i.e., a system that is consistent and partition tolerant but never available. CP is referring to a category of systems where availability is sacrificed only in the case of a network partition.

CA (Consistent and Available) — CA systems are consistent and available systems in the absence of any network partition. Often a single node's DB servers are categorized as CA systems. Single node DB servers do not need to deal with partition tolerance and are thus considered CA systems. The only hole in this theory is that single node DB systems are not a network of shared data systems and thus do not fall under the preview of CAP.

AP (Available and Partition Tolerant) — These are systems that are available and partition tolerant but cannot guarantee consistency.


### References:
1. http://robertgreiner.com/2014/08/cap-theorem-revisited/

2. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem

3. https://dzone.com/articles/understanding-the-cap-theorem